And you were talking about research work that
you've been involved in. Yeah. Well, as I
mentioned, my formal funding for the research
stopped about 71 or 72. Meantime, I got in to a
limited extent on some of the problems that were
beginning then to appear in the offshore area oil
spills. Worked a little bit on that. So as I said, I
continued on working and still am working in the
area of shells, even though I don't have any funds
from government sources or from business
sources. But the problems are basic, and the
problems are important. And I've got doctorate
students doing dissertations in that area. The
other area that is of more direct applied interest
and therefore is more fundable is the area in
offshore technology. And I've become involved
with the ASME in about 1975, and about the same time
I took a visiting professorship at Exxon
Production Research in order to get more, this is
down in Houston, to become more familiar with the
problems of the offshore area. So the other part of
my research endeavors are in the offshore
technology area, primarily with the riser, which
is the great conduit that goes from the drilling
vessel or the production bottom of the sea. And it
isn't a shift away from my basic area, it's a
compliment to, it's a very applied area, it gives
me a chance to go out and especially in the state of
Texas to meet with people who are working in that
area and especially our own graduates, who often
are hired by companies that have a direct interest
in that area.
Since you've been involved in engineering, have
the job opportunities for engineers always been
as good as they are today? No. No, in fact, the
market has fluctuated. When I came in 63, the space
program was just beginning to build up, build
itself up. It actually started around 1960. From
about 1960 or approximately from the time the
first Sputnik went up to about 1970, It was similar
to what we have here, but even more so because the
emphasis then was on graduate degrees. People
were hiring PhDs, not so much for the specialized
information, but rather because government
contracts allocated a certain amount of cost
funds to the degree. And so people would hire a PhD
simply to get his name down on the contract and
therefore get a higher return on their
investment. In 1970, or in some areas 1969, the
market crashed from approximately 69 to about 73
or 74. PhDs, whether in engineering or in science,
were literally driving taxi cabs. There was no
market for them. About that time, I had four PhDs
coming out, and I was quite concerned about them
finding employment. When I would go to the
companies, and plead for them, telling them that
these men would be satisfied with bachelor's
level salaries. And of course, they'd be more
qualified than any bachelor's degree, because
they had a bachelor's plus a master's degree. The
companies were reluctant to take them, saying
that as soon as the market would open up, these
people would leave, and they would lose so much
trained talent. Well, I tried to convince him at
that time that a PhD, in spite of his area of
specialization, was actually a fairly broadly
educated individual. He had everything a
bachelor's and a master's student had so far as
spectrum of courses are concerned. But he also had
the maturity that comes about in doing a research
project, and that is defining the project by
itself, going out and digging out the relevant
material, putting it together, writing a report
vis-a-vis the dissertation, and defending it.
And that itself, regardless of what the content of
the dissertation would be, was an important
element that would be good training for any area
that this individual would come in. And I tried to
convince industry to hire PhDs as generalists
rather than as specialists. Well, it was
rejected, but interestingly enough, now it has
changed around, and that's exactly what industry
is doing. They hire a PhD not because he did
research work in some esoteric, sophisticated
area, but rather because he has this technical
maturity and this experience. And so to answer
your question, from 63 to 72, or 72 perhaps is the
depth of it, was a pretty black area for any
graduate students. And I think we may be seeing
some of the effects even now where we have
difficulty attracting graduate students. You
know, there's an inertia in everything, and I
think there's also an inertia in the educational
process. From 63 to 72, we couldn't get anyone to go
for a doctorate because they said there were no
jobs available. Now, we have jobs available, but
nobody's willing to do it because they say the
compensation is not that much more than that of a
bachelor's degree.
Have you noticed any changes in the quality of the
students at Texas A&M in the 18 years that you've
been here? Not really. Though, when I talk with
some of my colleagues, I seem to be a minority. I
really don't. I would think, if anything, the
students coming in now would be probably better
prepared, more competent, at least
intellectually, to handle the material. The
motivation remains pretty much the same. When I
came in 63, the one thing that I did find is a very
highly motivated student. The idea of Texas A&M
being a poor boy's school was perhaps closer to the
truth then than it is now. I felt a certain kinship
because I could empathize with people, many
students coming in from the farms and they
themselves going through the same experience
that I had gone through. This was the first time for
anybody in their family to have ever gone so far. I
don't think that's true anymore. I think by and
large the white community in the United States is
generally of middle class stature and most of the
students that we see coming through A&M are
probably of middle class. The number of truly
so-called poor boys quotation marks is probably
much, much less now than it had been in the past. No,
I really don't see any change in the quality of the
student. I think certainly the times have
changed, and so you see the outward
manifestations being somewhat different. But
basically, the students are the same. For the
individual who goes to the engineering college,
for him to go there means that he has to have a
certain purpose in mind. He isn't floundering, as
many of the students are, wondering what they
want. He's pretty much determined that. And
because he has, and because engineering is a
fairly structured program, once he gets in,
things are pretty much determined for him, what
he's going to take and where he's going to go. And
again, that same motivation continues to exist.
Do you find that students today have any
weaknesses that they didn't have 18 years ago?
maybe in composition or something at this time?
No. And incidentally, composition has always
been a weak point of the College of Engineering,
even going back to my Rensselaer days. It was
almost axiomatic that if you were an engineer, you
were going to murder the language. And almost also
axiomatic that if you were an engineer, you hated
the humanities subjects. You couldn't
understand why they made you take English and why
they made you take history. So in that respect,
things still are pretty much the same.
Possibly, the student, when I first came, may have
been a little bit more mature, not because of
anything other than the economic status of the
student. Poverty tends to mature you much quicker
than middle class.
Well, mostly do you handle graduate students or
undergraduates? Graduates, well, I probably was
more deeply involved with graduate students than
I had been with undergraduate students. But since
I had come to A&M, I'd always wanted to teach at
least one undergraduate course. I never wanted to
lose contact with the undergraduate students.
A&M's strength, traditionally and in the future,
will still lie with its undergraduate program.
And that's true of any state institution. The
state legislature mandates that you educate
their young at the baccalaureate level. And I
never want to lose sight of that because that is the
uniqueness of this country. Unlike European
countries, we perhaps don't require as strict an
entrance requirement as perhaps Germany or
England would be. The quality of the individual,
the quality of the education perhaps isn't as
demanding as a general rule on the baccalaureate
level as it would be in any of the other countries.
But I believe in the supremacy of numbers. I
believe in having a large media, which may be lower
than the peaks of a small elite group. And so I'm
very much committed to, if you want, an
egalitarian concept of education.
How have the interests of women in engineering
affected the college? Well, for one thing, they
gave the professors, finally, parity with their
humanity peers. It used to be that if you had a girl
in engineering, you'd run around the hall and say,
hey, guess what I got? And it was the uniqueness of
the being. Now it's almost old hat. After all,
remember, faculty is as human as the students. All
we are just a little bit older. I don't think it has
directly affected engineering. I'm glad to see
it. because I think engineering has a great deal to
offer for many of the young girls. But there was
also an image of engineering that tended to keep
girls away in the past, namely as being a
male-dominated, rather rude, crude type of
profession. And that, by and large, has changed.
In actuality, it never was what people thought it
to be, namely elaborate steamfitters or
weightlifters. It always was primarily an
analytical group. What we're finding now is that
many students, and this perhaps is even true of the
girls, are going into engineering not because
they want to practice engineering as a
profession, but rather what they want is the
discipline, the self-discipline. And the study
happens that engineering enforces on all of its
students. Many of these people, upon graduation,
will go on into law, go into business, get their
MBAs, master of business administration, go into
medicine, or may go into a completely alien field
that I can't even conceive of. The sense that I have
among many students is that in engineering you
still have to practice good study habits because
your coursework is so structured that missing one
week's lecture actually means you miss about
three weeks the week that you didn't study the week
that you're getting now and the additional week of
the new material coming into being plus the fact
that in a modern society such as we we are a
technologically based society and to understand
and to be able to cope with that society means that
at least you have to understand the language of
technology and some of the concepts of technology
and many people are taking engineering almost as a
form of liberal arts, or almost as an alternative
to liberal arts, simply to be able to understand
what the limitations and the vocabularies of
technology are.
Do you have any idea of why relatively few blacks
enroll in engineering programs?
Yes, and it's a sad comment. For one thing, the very
capable blacks, the ones who could make it in
engineering without any problem, would probably
not go into engineering. They'd probably go into
law programs or into medical programs. In the one
case, by going into law, you find that they can get
into politics, and with medicine, obviously, not
only the prestige factor, but also the monetary
return. The other blacks are keeping away from
engineering because of the demands that are being
made. Engineering has never made any concession
to poor preparation on the part of the student. A
black coming from a black ghetto school would have
difficulty surviving in an engineering program
unless he took a great deal of remedial courses.
And in fact, they've tried this at some other
schools. The net result is that many of the blacks
looking at this situation and looking at the
alternatives and looking at the additional time
that would be required for him to get his degree,
usually about a year to a year and a half, and that
would be taken up in remedial courses, finds that
he's far better off going into some other area
where the remedial courses perhaps aren't
necessary or perhaps the curricula is much more
flexible, meaning perhaps his lack of
preparation. This is, well, it's not quite the
same, but it's similar to a program that we had when
women were first introduced into engineering.
One of the comments was, why aren't we attracting
more women? And the comment again was made that
those who could compete in engineering and had the
ability to do so would probably choose a pre-med or
pre-law program. And it's only recently that we
begin seeing the numbers in engineering that we
had hoped to see. And part of it was just the
realization that in engineering they could still
do the pre the law or the medicine. But what
engineering did was give them some of the side
benefits. The black is not in that position
because usually the woman in engineering, the
average woman who comes in, comes in from middle
class background and usually has a fairly good
background from her high school. Is this a
nationwide phenomenon, or is this peculiar to
Texas A&M? No, I think it's nationwide.
Do you have any indication how the engineering
program at Texas A&M compares with programs at
other universities across the country? I think
it's excellent. I think it always has been
excellent. I don't think A&M has to apologize to
anyone for any of its engineering programs. On the
baccalaureate level, which is where our strength
had laid for years and years, We were a well-known
institution. Our graduates were quite
successful. Our graduates were in demand. And the
institution was held in repute. So there's a
curious thing. When I first came to A&M in 63, and I
still see it in evidence, and I can't really
understand it, When I applied throughout the
country, I applied to a number of institutions
that I was aware of, people or institutions that
were known as engineering institutions. In the
state of Texas, having come from the New York City
area and then from Columbus area, the places that I
was aware of were Rice University, SMU, Baylor,
and Texas A&M. I never heard of the University of
Texas. If I say this not in jest, I'm dead serious.
And so when I came to A&M, the first thing that
surprised me were the Aggie jokes. There were
nothing more than the Pollock jokes or the Italian
jokes or the black jokes. You thought A&M was the
University of Texas? No, I didn't. I didn't really
think anything about it. I didn't even know that
the University of Texas existed. Just like
there's no such thing as the University of
Louisiana. Yeah, right. You know, it's the kind of
thing that if you were to say what is known
A&M would certainly be one of the standout
institutions. The other institutions I knew
about, St. Baylor simply because of the football
season. I never was really that much of a sports
fan. And SMU I knew about because I had a friend who
was in the service who was a graduate of SMU. And of
course, Rice was a well-known institution. And so
when I came, I thought I came to an institution that
was held in some sort of place of honor in the state
of Texas. And then I find out this whole business of
the competition between us and the University of
Texas. But the thing that disturbed me is this
inferiority complex that both the alumni and the
faculty had toward themselves, always saying,
how do we compare to the University of Texas? How do
we compare to somewhere else? It's as if though
somebody had programmed these people to make them
feel that they were inferior, rather than just
ignore anything and do that which they were well
known for. And this business with the University
of Texas infuriates me. University of Texas is a
fine institution, but it is a university in the
truest sense of the term. Its strengths lie not in
engineering, but they lie in the humanities. And
for that, it is well known. A&M shouldn't worry
about what the University of Texas is, we
shouldn't worry about competing with them
because we can't. The charters are different for
the two institutions. We're a land-grant school,
they were not. We had a different role to fulfill
than they. Why instead of looking toward them as
the role model, which covertly we have done, why
didn't we develop our own model? And this I could
never understand. It still exists. It exists even
today. The worst thing we could do is hire, on our
faculty, University of Texas graduates. Because
these people come in with an inbuilt bias against
this institution. You know, this is thought of the
pits. And that's the thing that drives me bananas.
And there's no way I can fight it. It seems to be
endemic to this area. But A&M has never had to
apologize to anyone for this program. Do you think
part of this inferiority complex that you're
talking about could be because of the location
away from the larger cities? No, not really,
because there are too many other institutions in
similar situations. Purdue is certainly way off
the sticks and has never had to worry about it. I'm
not sure where the problem lies. The problem may
lie in that perhaps many of the original people who
came to teach at A&M were products of the
University of Texas, or it may be part of a cultural
hang-up which still tended to look at engineering
and agriculture as being really
sub-professions. And to be in them meant that you
really weren't performing, or you really weren't
at the same level of sophistication as, say, your
equivalents at the University of Texas. I'm not
sure where, but I'm sure it's deep-seated in the
roots of the history of the state of Texas. Do you
ever regret coming to Texas A&M? No, I never did.
Now, you understand that will vary. Everybody has
these momentary regrets no matter what you do. By
and large, no. I've enjoyed it myself. I've had a
sense of fulfillment. I've had a reasonable sense
of success. And I still have a sense of
contributing and will continue to do so. You
divide your time. equally between teaching and
research? Pretty much so, yes. What's some of the
research projects that you're handling now?
Well, my research projects right now, of course,
are truly doctoral students. I've had six PhDs in
the last two years, and unfortunately they came in
batches. And I've got three right now, but the
research projects have to deal with laminated
shell theory, the lamination mold failures,
which is a unique mold failure when you have
different materials bonded together and the
bonding agent happens to be the weakest link in the
chain. So these have got, in fact, one
dissertation being finished on that and my own
research in that area. And then the other two have
to deal with the offshore area. One of them has to
deal with the analysis of the riser joint, which is
the pipe itself. The pipe is subjected to subsea
loads. It has large values of displacement. It's
dynamic rather than static. And the other has to
deal with the mechanism which holds the pipe up and
which is critical in providing the support for the
riser system. It's called the riser tensioner and
the slip joint. And so those are the areas that
right now I'm working on. In the 18 years that
you've been at Texas A&M, have you noticed any
difference in state legislative funding through
the years for engineering programs? Or has it been
about the same throughout this period? No, it's
probably increased. One of the concerns that I've
always had, and one of the questions that I've had,
with regard to funding is why, when the University
of Texas and Texas A&M are of the same size, why has
the University of Texas salaries, year by year,
rank by rank, been $1,000 to $2,000 more than those
of the A&M faculty? There's obviously a
disparity. You know, they're on the same formula
funding as we are. They're on the same permanent
fund as we are. And yet there is a difference. And I
sometimes wonder whether that difference is not
manifest in either the ability of the
administration presenting its case or in what
sometimes is called creative administration.
A&M perhaps is uniquely characterized in its
administration mode as being scrupulously
honest to the word and to the intent of the
legislature. I have a suspicion that at the
University of Texas and the University of
Houston, they may be scrupulously honest to the
word, but not necessarily to the intent. What they
have is then what you call creative bookkeeping.
Is your wife teaching here now? No. When we came to
Texas, I wanted her to completely retire. I wanted
her to be a homemaker, and wanted her to have the
leisure to develop her own talents. And this is
what she's done. She's been involved with various
groups. She's put on seminars, book reviews,
things of this sort. And so in that respect, I think
she's contributed. Do you have children? None.
Let me ask you something about foreign students,
foreign students who are in the graduate program
in engineering. There seems to be a relatively
large number of these. Could you account for this?
No. These are about, I would suspect, we're
writing about 50-50, 50% foreign international
students or international students for 50%
American students. There's probably a number of
reasons for it. I'm sure some of the international
students coming over was a way of getting away from
their country. In some other cases, where the
students would come in for a bachelor's degree,
they would stay on for their masters and doctors to
delay going back to their own country. But I think
by and large, the greatest number of students have
come to this country and come to A&M, or for that
matter, any other university, because the United
States still is a leader in technology. and for
them it meant getting the specialized
information and education that they would need to
go back.
Do you find that these foreign students have any
difficulty with the English language as
affecting their academic skills? Oh yes, I'm sure
of that. They vary. There's no way to make any
generalization. Some come in with very, very poor
skills. The university
tries to screen them through the TOEFL scores.
Spell that. T-O-E-F-L. It's an abbreviation, an
acronym for Test on English, T-O-E-F-L, English
Fluency Language or something of this sort. I
don't know what it is. You have to have a certain
TOEFL score before you're even admitted to A&M.
And having been admitted, you may be asked to go to
the English Language Institute. So there's a
recognition on the part of the university that it
would be unfair to bring a student in who might be
academically well prepared, but yet still may
fail because he can't handle the language. A lot
depends on what country the student may have come
from. Some countries, though they may have a
parent
language or a dominant language, will
nevertheless have English as a secondary
language. And these students are reasonably
fluent in it. In other countries, English was
completely learned within a three-month or a
five-month crash course, and these students are
going to have a difficult time. The thing that we
must remember when we look at students such as this
is to realize that most of these students are the
cream of their country. They are extremely well
qualified. Their problem is not in assimilating
the material, it's in handling the language.
Can we digress? Can I ask you something about how
you feel about this situation facing Poland
today, since you haven't got your parents from
Poland? Well, a number of comments that I can make.
Poles have unfortunately almost had a suicidal
tendency. They haven't won a major war since
17-something. They did remarkably well in
defeat. I don't know what's going to happen. I do
know this, that it's a very critical period for
both Poland, for Russia, and for the eastern
satellites. To put it into a certain, to a
perspective, to understand what Russia's
concerns would be, this would be akin to Mexico
suddenly becoming Marxist and becoming a
virulent communist state right on our border. And
you can understand the concerns that we would have
for Poland. Now, going for the free unions, now
they're not switching from socialism to
capitalism, but nevertheless they're breaking
away from the traditional Soviet communist mode,
would be very much akin to that. They're playing a
dangerous game. My own feeling is that the
government, which seems to be the adversary of the
unions, is really working in collusion for it.
It's an experiment. And I'm sure somewhere,
someplace, there have been meetings or there are
continuing meetings where representatives of
the government, representatives of the church,
and representatives of solidarity meet and plan
out the latest scenario. You know, how far can they
push? What should the government's response be to
satisfy Moscow? But fundamentally, they want to
see how much autonomy can they gain. And
ultimately, as an absolute statement, I'm very
much in agreement with it. I think, again, all
countries, all people should have the freedom, a
certain freedom of choice. For Russia, it
represents a tremendous challenge, not only
because Poland is on its borders, but because what
happens in Poland is being very closely watched in
other European satellites. And it's no great
secret that the satellites are satellites not by
their own volition, but because they had no
choice. So Hungary, East Germany,
Czechoslovakia, Poland are all there because
they have to be. Given a spark, Russia feels that
all of them would break away and they would have
then a new Yugoslavia on their border. I think they
may pull it off. Again, it's going to be sort of
brinkmanship right up to the very end. Russia, I
don't think, is going to intervene militarily. I
think what it's going to do is use an economic
weapon, and it's already threatened to do so. What
it hopes to do is to literally starve and freeze the
polls into submission by just refusing them any
aid. And this is then where the free world's role
comes in. And then again, what would be the Russian
response if we started now bringing in massive
aid? So I really don't know. I can see so many
different scenarios occurring. But by and large,
I'm extremely sympathetic to what they're trying
to do. Do you ever have any aspirations of entering
an administration? Not really. I had to make a
choice about seven or eight years ago when I was
offered a department headship at another
institution. I think as you go through the
university experience, at one time or another,
everybody starts thinking, gee, I wonder what it
would be like to be a dean or a department head, or do
this or do that. And perhaps that's right. The
thing that I had to convince myself is that being a
department head and a dean is not a promotion. That
there are, in fact, only three ranks within the
university other than the students. Assistant,
associate, and full professor. Everything else
is ancillary. A department head and a dean is there
to serve the faculty, not for the faculty to serve
him. And administration then, from that point of
view, is no longer an appeal. And I refuse to accept
a deanship as being looked upon as a promotion. I
can do everything that I want from this desk as a
full professor, insofar as giving advice,
insofar as counseling, insofar as doing my
research, and most of all, having a sense of
freedom to do what I want to do without having to
answer or fear for my job.
Is there anything else that we need to touch on
before closing? I don't think so. Of course, we
could, you know, what somebody said, scratch a
professor and you find a demagogue, as you can see.
Well, I certainly appreciate your taking the
time.